Downloaded from
YTS.MX
Official YIFY movies site:
Romeo: Where you from?
Like from...
Queens or Brooklyn or...?
Mero: BX all day.
Might catch me on like.
Vice. and like 183rd. bro.
Romeo: You serious?
Mero: Deadass.
It was Yo! All merengue.
bachata. salsa. bolero.
That was it.
Romeo: I've always said
that New York is like.
I mean. the Bronx.
[music]
Assistant: Marker.
Mero: Alright. brother.
So. like.
in your own words.
what does bachata
mean to you?
Romeo: That's a
really good question.
I'ma have to tell you
in Spanish though.
Mero: Yeah.
Go ahead.
[music]
Hey! Hey! Hey! Hey!
Woman: Please make my life
and if Aventura is here.
I'm going to die.
[music]
Crowd: Romeo!
Romeo! Romeo!
[music]
Romeo: To appreciate MetLife...
...we need to understand
where bachata started.
[music]
We need to appreciate
what happened in the past.
[crowd cheers]
[crowd cheers louder]
[music]
Romeo: A lot of people
don't have the story clear.
[crowd cheers]
You ready?
Announcer: The situation
in the Dominican Republic
is clothed in mystery.
Romeo: We need to appreciate
what happened in the past.
Announcer: Dictator's evil war
reign of terror and bloodshed.
Man: The rise from...
Announcer: ...the grimmest
of poverty...
Mero: ...to the city...
Romeo: We need to evolve.
Mero: ...to the Bronx.
Reporter: Santos is set
to rock Yankee Stadium.
Romeo: You need to
reinvent yourself.
Mero: That meteoric
rise to MetLife.
Romeo: You need to
be very passionate.
You need to love this.
And I love this.
[music]
Mero: Bachata started
in the campo.
on the rural countryside.
The genre was
really reserved for people.
poor people. on the outskirts.
So. to have a star
of your caliber
go around the whole country
and do free shows...
Romeo: Right.
Mero: ...that's big. bro.
[music]
It was like something that...
I really needed.
[music]
Romeo: Something
that I've had in mind
for quite a few years now.
I thought about it
when I was in Aventura.
like you just get caught up
and you never
give things priority.
and you should.
[muffled singing]
Romeo: It truly reminded me
of when I started
with the guys in Aventura
because we used to perform
in every pueblo from DR.
[music]
[crowd cheering]
[crowd singing]
[Teodoro singing with crowd]
[singing]
Mero: Romeo's tour
returns to bachata's roots.
in the campo.
But bachata didn't always
sound like this.
To understand
bachata's journey.
we have to go back
to the beginning.
So. I went back to el patio.
the Dominican Republic.
to find bachata's origins
in order to fully appreciate
how far the genre has come.
My name is Joel Martinez.
But you probably know me
as Mero or The Kid Mero.
Like Romeo.
I also grew up in the Bronx
in a Dominican family
surrounded by Bachata
both old and new.
Given that Romeo and I
have that in common.
Romeo asked me to go on this
journey to lend my perspective.
though a perspective
very similar to his own.
So dope to be a part
of a project like this.
Where do I begin?
♪ Esta noche yo he venido ♪
Mero: José is like an OG.
To put it in like hip hop terms.
he's Grandmaster Flash
and Romeo is like Jay-Z.
There's so many elements
of the old mixed in to the new.
♪ Porque lo que yo he sentido
por ti no he podido ♪
[music]
Mero: Bachata was born
in the countryside
of the Dominican Republic
under the reign
of a cruel dictator.
Announcer 1:
The Dominican strong man...
Announcer 2:
...Dictator Rafael Trujillo.
Announcer 1: ...Rafael Trujillo.
Mero: Rafael Trujillo.
Announcer 1: One of the most
absolute iron-fisted rules
in modern history.
Announcer 2: A rule
which created
fabulous wealth for a few
and the grimmest
of poverty for the majority.
Mero: He killed tens
of thousands of people.
Trujillo hated bachata.
He thought bachata
was too poor. too vulgar.
and amoral.
so he banned it.
But against his wishes.
the music was kept alive
in the countryside.
in local bars. brothels
and gatherings
by performers
who would later be referred to
as the first bachateros.
[music]
♪ Con la otra mano
una copa de vino ♪
Mero: Bachata continued to grow
in the impoverished outskirts
until May 30th. 1961.
Everything changed.
[announcer music]
Announcer: A 31-year reign
of terror and bloodshed
comes to an end
in the Dominican Republic
as dictator Rafael Trujillo is
shot down by seven assassins.
He ruled by the gun
and died by the gun.
[music]
Mero: And the floodgates opened.
With Trujillo's reign over.
bachata emerged
from the countryside.
And exactly one year later...
Mero: Along with Calderón
records from the likes
of Luis Segura
and Leonardo Paniagua
were pivotal as bachata
grew in popularity
in the genre's early years.
♪ ¿Qué será de mí con tantas
penas en mi pobre vida? ♪
♪ ¿Qué será de mí...? ♪
Mero: Seeing José
from the beginning
and now seeing
where Romeo's taking it...
is wild.
[music]
Mero: When you did that.
"La gira del pueblo."
rocking with the people
that don't necessarily
come from means.
Romeo: Yeah.
You know. these are people
that they're not necessarily
able to afford a ticket
when I go to Olímpico
in Santo Domingo.
So. I knew I had to do it.
[music]
Mero: You hit a lot of towns
that most people don't hit.
especially people.
artists of your caliber.
And one of those towns
was Moca
where your father
is from.
Romeo: When we were originally
supposed to do that show.
Mero: Yeah.
Romeo: The weather
wasn't really helping us.
So. it got postponed
and then it rained again.
They were about
to postpone again
and I said. "Look.
let's just do this.
With rain or without rain.
let's just do this."
[music]
♪ Vete pal diablo. mujer ♪
Romeo: It was beautiful to be
able to connect. you know.
Mero: Yeah. Yeah.
Romeo: There had to
be a few cousins.
Mero: Yeah.
♪ Así soy yo
de piedra y hierro ♪
♪ A mí nadie
puede vencerme ♪
♪ Así soy yo
de piedra y hierro ♪
♪ A mí nadie puede vencer ♪
♪ Yo salí intacto
de tu infierno ♪
♪ El diluvió no me afectó ♪
♪ Hoy yo sigo invicto
a tus juegos ♪
♪ Y tu hermana me besa
mucho mejor ♪
[music]
Mero: When bachata
left the countryside
after Trujillo's death.
this is where it went.
The capital of
the Dominican Republic:
Santo Domingo...
...although it didn't stop here.
[crowd cheers]
But to understand the next
phase of bachata's trajectory.
we first need to understand
what makes bachata. bachata.
I go to meet with a group
of local musicians
to learn the basics
of the bachata sound.
the instruments.
the techniques.
the rhythms.
From like.
a technical standpoint.
explain bachata to the layman.
somebody that has no idea
what bachata is.
[music]
[tapping instrument]
[laughing]
[crosstalk]
[tapping instrument]
[music]
Mero: The illest thing though
about the genre of bachata
is that it works
in any atmosphere.
you know what I mean?
In any setting.
Huge concert. it works.
Intimate setting here
and it works.
you know what I mean?
Like it's such a
dynamic genre of music
that you can go to anywhere
and it just works.
[music]
♪ ¿Quién te dijo que no puedo
acabar con tu atropello? ♪
♪ ¿Quién te dijo que el dolor
no tiene límites ni freno? ♪
Mero: So. you already know
bachata started in the campo.
Now. we're in the city.
We're in Santo Domingo.
We're in la Zona Colonial.
which is like the Times Square
of Santo Domingo.
So. the music has
become more mainstream.
you know what I mean?
The rise from there to here...
...to MetLife is bananas. man.
[music]
Mero: To reach those heights.
bachata had to cross an ocean.
Trujillo had banned immigration
out of the Dominican Republic.
But after his death.
leaving the island became
possible for the first time.
[music]
Economic and
political instability
led to mass migration.
Over 9.000 Dominicans
moved to the U.S. a year.
particularly in New York
in the Washington Heights
neighborhood in Manhattan.
The differences between
the two environments.
New York and the
Dominican Republic. were vast.
So. pioneers created
social clubs
and the Americanized version
of "colmados"
in search of community
among their fellow Dominicans.
Here. bachata
found a home abroad.
Man: Domino!
Mero: And soon.
Dominican culture took hold
in a neighboring borough.
my hometown of the Bronx.
[music]
Tommy Mottola: The Bronx is
probably the most unique place
certainly in this country
with respect to talent.
and I would
say maybe in the world.
Romeo: Growing up
in the Bronx for me
was an incredible experience.
You know. you kind of have...
Tommy Mottola: So. there's a lot
of history there
and a lot of roots
from immigrants. right.
which we're all from.
And certainly. Latin music
had its foothold there.
Romeo: It was like a mix
of a different culture
in every corner.
You know. like.
you go downstairs.
you listen to a little bit
of hip hop.
You got the neighbor
rocking some salsa.
You open the window
in the third floor.
you hear some merengue.
Lenny Santos: I wasn't drawn
to bachata at the beginning
because it sounded
kind of like really old.
Like. we didn't look cool
listening to that type of stuff
at the age of 14. 15. 16.
But when this artist
came about.
called Anthony Santos.
I was like.
"Wow. that sounds cool.
I like the way
the guitar sounds.
[music]
Luis Vargas. Teodoro.
Thalía: And then suddenly.
boom. bachata in your face.
[music]
It was like real music...
...versus all the pop culture
going on
with MTV and everything.
Boom. real music.
Lenny Santos: These artists
began singing with more feeling.
more melodic flows. and...
Romeo: Juan Luis Guerra.
Chi Chi: That was the sound.
You know what I mean?
So. it's like. "It's not broken.
don't fix it."
Then along comes
these four guys. right?
[music]
Lenny Santos: I met Romeo
and I didn't believe his
name was Anthony Santos.
I met him through
one of my musicians.
And he told me.
"Hey. there's this kid.
"He sings all the time
in the lunchroom.
"And I don't know
what is his voice.
"I never heard a voice
like that in my life.
"It sounds crazy.
You gotta hear him."
So. me and Anthony
are conversating.
I'm like. "Your name
is Anthony Santos?"
Like. "Yeah. look at my ID."
"Oh. yo. it is."
Then. he's telling me.
"Oh. you know
this song by him?
You know that song?"
I'm like. "Yeah.
I know that song.
Play it."
[humming]
"Yo."
[music]
[muffled music]
Romeo: I started doing music
in this...
literally in this room.
I just started. you know. like.
writing songs.
I had a really
strong passion for writing.
Mero: Yeah?
[music]
I can use an example lyrically.
♪ It hurts my di... ♪
What does that mean?
He's like. "My di...
dictionary."
So. he will leave that
to your imagination.
And it was straight up.
You know. it was vulgar.
Like. you knew what he meant.
I was listening to everything.
I know as much about Biggie
and Tupac and Hov
as much as I know
about Luis Vargas.
Raulín.
and Anthony Santos.
Mero: Yeah.
Romeo: But I know my shit
in salsa too.
Mero: Right. right.
Romeo: And I think that that
plays a big part in why my music
even early on like. that fusion
where it wasn't something
I was forcing
or I was doing intentionally.
It was just organic.
It was just me and my friends
and my cousin.
Lenny. Mikey and Henry
having a good time.
[music]
We brought that.
you know...
Mero: Like. a swag to it.
Romeo: We got Bronx swag.
Mero: Yeah.
Romeo: It goes.
"5:00 in the morning."
[inaudible]
Romeo: Like I said.
we were just having fun.
It was just like. "Yo."
This is what we know how to do.
And me personally doing
what I knew how to do best.
Some of my closest friends
still say that.
like. "That's the
best shit you do
and the only shit
you do good."
[laughter]
You know?
Mero: Yeah. Yeah.
Lenny Santos: We finally
got the first gig.
It was a birthday party.
And I'm thinking
about it right now.
I remember every single detail.
So. he goes...
He was always dressing nice.
That was always his thing.
fashion. smelling good.
and his hair done.
We actually had
to get some guys
to walk 10 blocks
with the speakers.
Then we started getting
restaurant gigs here and there.
We'll go perform three.
four sets in one night
in the middle
of a school night.
Three sets in one night.
We'd be finished.
like. by 6:00 in the morning.
Oh. we got school
the next day.
Like. we never said.
"We're gonna be famous.
We're gonna kill it.
We're gonna sell out arenas
and stadiums around the world."
We never...
we never felt that.
And I remember from one day
to another. kept creating.
And some of the songs I did with
Aventura in our first album.
I was living with these records
for nearly seven years.
[music]
♪ ¿Cuándo volverás? ♪
♪ Si yo te quise.
si yo te amé ♪
♪ Ay. mami linda. vuelve
otra vez ♪
Romeo: We first dropped
an album as just "Teenagers."
So. that album flopped.
And we were just hurt.
because. you know. we felt
like we were like intruders.
You know. that's what
people would tell us.
Bachata fans would be like.
"Yo. that's not bachata.
You can't do this.
You can't speak Spanglish.
You can't dress that way."
Romeo: Yeah.
I remember when I first went
to DR at the age of like 17.
not knowing that reputation
of what bachata represented.
I would go around
telling people super excited.
"Yo. guess what I do.
Guess what I sing."
And then I started. you know.
educating myself.
I'm gonna always follow my gut.
I'm gonna always follow my gut
when it comes to creating.
when it comes to what type
of music I should be doing.
And going back to
the Aventura days.
we were a little disappointed
that the first Aventura album
didn't really take off
the way we thought it would.
But we were passionate
about music.
I recorded four songs
with the guys.
And we started giving these
songs in a CD to friends
because they loved the songs.
Now. you just
don't give it to anyone
because this is going to be
a part of our next album
when we leave this label.
when we go to
the other one.
whatever. blah. blah.
And I don't know. bro.
Somehow. someway
the shit got leaked.
It was like a virus.
And it started in New York.
And out of like 10 cars
that would pass by.
seven. at least seven
had these four records.
especially "Obsesión."
And what's interesting
about that song
is that it wouldn't go away.
It would not go away.
Like. when we thought.
"Okay. this is it. bro.
we're going to have to start
recording other records."
it started popping in DR...
Mero: Yeah.
Romeo: In the same way.
it started in a pueblo. Baní.
The shit was just like
blowing up.
From Baní. Santiago.
next thing you know all DR.
Then the following year.
we start popping in Europe.
same song. "Obsesión."
And Britney at the time.
which was like.
on top of the world.
was number two.
And we had a bachata number one
in Europe. the charts.
♪ Son las cinco de la mañana
y yo no he dormido nada ♪
Joaquín Díaz: It started
with Aventura.
Aventura created a style.
a style of bachata.
Lenny Santos: You know.
that music that's called
Announcer: Aventura!
Joaquín Díaz: When Aventura
broke up.
Romeo took that even further.
Romeo started his solo album.
which is Formula Vol 1.
[music]
Joaquín Díaz: Romeo has
his own style.
which is a little
different from Aventura.
It's two different sounds.
Romeo: Simple. yet elegant.
Joaquín Díaz: Romeo took it to
the romantic version of bachata
where now girls
were falling in love
with not only the songs
but with him.
Tommy Mottola: It was so
overwhelming.
The melodies were so incredible.
♪ Enfrenté a la competencia
olvidando sin dolencia ♪
Tommy Mottola: And Anthony's
voice as the lead instrument.
It's almost like an instrument
that you've never heard.
[music]
Undeniably distinguishable
from any sound
and any singer in the world.
Newscaster:
The megastar Romeo Santos
is the biggest name in
Latin music right now.
Newcaster:
The Bronx-born musician
is having the biggest
homecoming of his career.
He's already sold out
back-to-back concerts
at Madison Square Garden.
And now. Santos is set
to rock Yankee Stadium.
[music]
Marc Anthony:
Yankee Stadium two nights.
I'm like. "What?
What? What? What?
Who does that?
Does it?"
Now the next guy
is going to go.
"Romeo Santos did it."
He just took Latin music
to a whole other level.
Joaquín Díaz: That definitely
caught the attention
of all the other musicians
from other genres.
They finally realized.
"Wait. there's something there
we have not seen before."
[music]
Man:
Yo. open the door!
Man: Coming.
Joaquín Díaz: He comes into
the studio. I will say.
like an architect.
He has his drawings
already here.
He sees the whole picture
from beginning to end.
Romeo: It is
a very intense process.
I consider myself
to be a perfectionist.
[music]
Man: One more time.
♪ De lo único remedio
lo acepta ♪
Man: Or...
♪ De lo único remedio
lo acepta ♪
♪ Hay amores que ♪
Romeo: That's better.
That's better.
Man: That's better.
Romeo: Papi...
It's like we're having fun.
But. you know. we're gonna live
with these records
for the rest of our lives.
And we're gonna be gone.
and these songs are gonna live.
so do it as best as you can.
Romeo: Stop. stop.
[music track playing
through speakers]
Romeo: You always want to feel
what you felt with first love.
What is first love?
"Obsesión."
"¿Cuándo Volverás?"
It's not that I'm trying
to recreate that.
But I want to feel that feeling
that I felt when I created that.
And I get that
most of the time.
This is a record.
Man: Oh. yeah.
Sergio George: You see Romeo
bringing in a person like Usher
on a bachata track
and bilingual.
And you got both sides who don't
even speak each other's language
understanding and
they're feeling it.
It has to be real.
So. that's what's happening now
with this new movement
of the Spanish-speaking
Bad Bunny. Ozuna. Romeo
who are singing in Spanish.
And maybe they have a few
words here and there in English.
But that's where the market was
naturally going to go
because the Hispanic culture
has exploded
all over the world now.
[music]
Mero: Having traveled
across the country
in search of the soul
of bachata...
...I finally got the chance
to see Romeo live.
The fact that it's called.
"La gira del pueblo"
and it's free
is super fitting. bro.
because like. everybody's
just regular people. man.
[crowd cheering]
So. personally. to me.
this is literally
a dream come true. literally.
because I grew up
listening to this guy.
making that connection
from my youth.
So. you know. growing up
and listening to it
in the background.
singing along in my little
beat-up Honda Civic.
This is incredible. man.
[music]
♪ Mi memoria ha conservado
lo que se ha llevado el viento ♪
♪ Y yo estoy estancado
en esos tiempos ♪
♪ Cuando tú me amabas y con
gran fulgor sentía tus besos ♪
♪ Dime. quítame esta duda ♪
♪ ¿Quién es esta extraña que
se ha apoderado de tu ser? ♪
♪ ¿Dónde está la amante loca
que me erizaba la piel? ♪
♪ Porque ya tú no me tocas
como lo hacía esa mujer ♪
♪ Algo no anda bien ♪
[music]
Romeo: It just made
so much sense to do this
with this album.
Mero: Speaking of that...
[music]
...Utopia is a fire concept.
How did you come up
with that idea of doing duets
with like...
Romeo: This was a project
that I had in mind
for maybe seven. eight years.
I wanted to do a concept album
where I do one song
with each and every one of these
pioneers of bachata.
This is my gift to DR
for so much they've given me.
[music]
The plan. to be honest with you.
was to only tour in DR.
But that was it. that was all
I thought I was gonna do.
[music]
But the album came out
and something interesting
happened.
People were getting the concept.
Mero: Yeah.
It resonated with people.
Romeo: Yeah.
And I just had this crazy...
I was perceiving like.
"This is special.
This is going beyond DR."
I had a conversation.
I'm like. "I need
to do something big.
something that was
like a statement."
And. you know.
someone mentioned MetLife.
Marc Anthony: T woke up
one day and was like.
"Yo. what's the
biggest venue like?
And let's do it."
Romeo: At first. I was like.
"Okay. we could do that."
And then I just asked.
"What's the capacity?"
When they said. "87.000."
I bitched out a little.
I was like. "Wait. wait. wait."
Marc Anthony: You know. I heard
about this MetLife thing.
In the beginning.
I was like. [gasping].
It just took my breath away.
I was like. "What you doing?"
Like. I'm like.
"You've got balls. bro."
But if anybody could
pull it off. it's T.
There are a lot
of people talking shit.
He does it.
That's the difference.
Joaquín Díaz: No Latin artist
had filled the MetLife
by him or herself.
Usually. artists will go
in a group
of two or three or four artists.
And then. you know.
they will sell tickets.
But Romeo by himself.
all by himself.
Marc Anthony:
Of course there's pressure
in putting yourself
in that position
because it can go wrong.
Right?
And it will hurt you
more than the good it does
when you put yourself
in those big situations.
Group: Amen.
Marc Anthony: How many talks
do you think he had?
How many people
were like. "Naw. um. oh.
"I don't know.
Eh. ah. oh. oh man.
"Oh. yeah. the budget.
Oh. I don't know."
He had to plow through that.
do it. kick ass.
sell it out and he goes. "Next."
You have to be that guy.
And that's who he is.
Joaquín Díaz: He was able
to fill the place up.
That's groundbreaking
for bachata.
It's come a long way.
Romeo is taking it
to the next level.
He broke the boundaries
of bachata not being accepted
to bachata being respected.
[crowd cheers]
[music]
You ready?
[crowd cheers]
[music]
♪ No creo bien arrepentirme
de los hechos ♪
♪ Jehová no se equivoca ♪
♪ Te me puso en el camino como
prueba y tuve que aprender ♪
♪ Todo lo que brilla.
no es porque sea oro ♪
♪ Tú no eres primavera.
fuiste un invierno ♪
♪ Torbellino. tormenta.
pero sigo en pie ♪
[crowd singing]
[crowd cheering]
♪ Tras la tempestad
llega la calma ♪
[crowd singing]
♪ Y la excusa que
no puedo ver ♪
Romeo: Santo Domingo!
♪ Así soy yo.
de piedra y de hierro ♪
♪ A mí nadie ♪
[crowd singing]
♪ Así soy yo.
de piedra y de hierro ♪
♪ A mí nadie
puede vencer ♪
♪ Yo salí intacto
de tu infierno ♪
♪ El diluvio no me afectó ♪
♪ Hoy yo sigo invicto
a tus juegos ♪
♪ Y tu hermana me besa ♪
♪ Así soy yo.
de piedra y de hierro ♪
♪ A mí nadie puede vencer ♪
♪ Así soy yo.
de piedra y de hierro ♪
♪ A mí nadie
me puede vencer ♪
[crowd cheering]
[music]
Joaquín Díaz: Wow.
that performance.
that was...
[giggles]
Let me tell you.
It was a lot of work.
Romeo was the mastermind
of putting it all together
and his conception of what
he wanted for the show.
But we have a great team.
of course. a great crew.
Everybody. you know.
is to be credited.
Romeo: Give a big hand
to all these musicians
that did this show
for promotion only.
[laughter]
That's huge.
Papa. I believe in God.
Papa. but. nah. nah. nah.
papa.
Artie Pabon: We didn't
have a lot of time.
And we had
a sort of drawing out
what Romeo envisioned the
stage to look like. Utopia.
because it was all themed
around the album "Utopia."
To a certain degree.
he was the underdog.
In the industry.
a lot of people doubted
the undertaking of one night.
80.000 people.
I know he was confident
all along. but myself.
you know. I'm saying.
"Man. the last thing I want
is to. you know. not to
meet the expectations."
[singing]
Woman: Sing that shit.
Sing it.
[singing]
♪ Baby ♪
Romeo: Let's go.
[music]
Artie Pabon: Man. how many
people can go out
and in 90 days
sell 80.000 tickets anywhere?
That's not an easy task
on any genre.
Joaquín Díaz: Not only the crowd
that we had.
but it was just the undertaking
of so many artists.
Mero: He united
all these legends.
who meant a lot to him
and to the bachata genre.
[music]
♪ Es tu rabia
que domina tu actitud ♪
♪ Ese ego que me clava
de una cruz ♪
♪ Tus labios gritan:
"Sal de aquí" ♪
[music]
♪ De perfecto no me
puedo encasillar ♪
♪ Me arrepiento
del pasado y voy a jurar ♪
♪ No te he vuelto a ser infiel.
deja tus celos ♪
♪ Convénceme que
no es orgullo ♪
♪ Que no me amas
y no hay juego ♪
♪ Háblame. aunque sea con odio ♪
♪ Porque el coraje
lo aniquilo con un beso ♪
♪ Me voy no queriendo ♪
♪ Pues no es secreto
que yo te quiero ♪
♪ Yo interpreto el silencio ♪
♪ Si en la puerta
no veo tu impedimento ♪
Mero: After seeing Romeo live.
I decided I needed
to brush up
on my bachata
dance steps ASAP.
Hey!
Hey.
Mero: Mero.
Man: Okay.
[laughing]
[music]
♪ Píntame la cara.
yo también te voy a ayudar ♪
♪ A ver quién más
provoca carcajadas ♪
♪ Tú y yo. payasos.
fantaseando por su amor ♪
♪ Y ella ni devuelve
la mirada ♪
♪ Así la ironía
de este cuento ♪
♪ Ambos estamos expuestos
a una burla emocional ♪
♪ Y sé. a mí no me cabe duda ♪
♪ Que no va a ser
ni mía ni tuya ♪
♪ Pero déjennos soñar ♪
♪ Amores que causan
las chanzas ♪
♪ Señalan
se ríen así sin piedad ♪
♪ Pero son amores ingenuos ♪
♪ Despiertan sarcasmo
en la vecindad ♪
♪ Porque aparentemente
ella es feliz ♪
♪ Y se burlan de frente
de ti y de mí ♪
♪ Y qué mala es la gente ♪
♪ Una careta no disfraza
el dolor ♪
♪ Una careta
no disfraza el dolor ♪
[clapping on beat]
♪ Una careta
no disfraza el dolor ♪
[clapping]
♪ Una careta
no disfraza el dolor ♪
♪ Porque aparentemente ♪
♪ Ella es feliz ♪
♪ Y se burlan de frente ♪
♪ De ti. de mí ♪
♪ Y qué mala es la gente ♪
♪ Una careta
no disfraza el dolor ♪
♪ Porque aparentemente
ella es feliz ♪
♪ Y se burlan de frente
de ti y de mí ♪
♪ Y qué mala es la gente ♪
♪ Una careta
no disfraza el dolor ♪
♪ El rostro alegre ♪
Romeo: [Inaudible]
♪ Somos dos payasos
en un circo de amor ♪
[crowd cheering]
Frank Reyes: Whoo!
[music]
♪ Y voy a morir
de un amargue ♪
♪ Y la asesina eres tú ♪
♪ Este masoquismo es rentable.
aunque me afecta la salud ♪
♪ Me hago el sordo y ciego
sabiendo me puede ir mejor ♪
♪ Cuidadito ahí.
te crees que eres muy sabia ♪
♪ Amor. no quita conocimiento ♪
♪ Yo sé bien quién eres tú ♪
♪ Mala ♪
[crowd sings]
♪ Malvada. pero estás buena ♪
♪ No me importa
que seas una canalla ♪
♪ Tú me enciendes
y me apagas ♪
♪ Me subes a la cima
y me lanzas ♪
♪ Y esa vaina me acorrala ♪
♪ Una psicología
que me atrapa ♪
[guitar solo]
[music]
♪ Voy a permitir tus chantajes.
aunque resulten mi perdición ♪
♪ Tengo una paciencia adaptable
que se amolda a esta situación ♪
Mero: My journey here
in the Dominican Republic
continues.
In one of my last stops.
I head back to the countryside
to see how the music
is kept alive
and experienced every day
in the kind of towns
where bachata thrived
in its early years.
It's a way more
intimate experience
than you might find in. say.
an urban environment
like Santo Domingo.
[music]
♪ Mala... ♪
Mero: It's one thing to see
a band at a fancy club...
...and a different thing to
see a band in a place like here.
Like. Najayo...
where if you look out
onto the ocean.
it's families here.
You know what I mean?
This is locals.
Like. this intimate. personal...
Like. the majority
of bachata songs.
you're bearing your soul.
You know what I mean?
So. it's like here.
that connection. the energy
like. you feel it.
It's palpable.
[music]
Romeo: I think bachata.
you know. one
of the key elements is.
people do listen to
what you're saying.
It's not like...
Certain urban records
is about the beat.
So. if you have good lyrics
on top of a good beat.
then that's a plus.
But bachata. you just can't
just say something
that is insignificant.
Many artists have
told the girl. "I love you."
How am I gonna
make that special?
And you need
to say something
that even if it has
been said before.
it needs to be unique.
in its own way.
Mero: It's like
Dominican blues.
You know what I mean?
So. like. it's emotional music.
so you're more
listening to it for feeling
as opposed to like.
"Yo. I want to see this dude
shred on the guitar."
You know what I mean?
Like. even though
they do shred. bro.
[music]
♪ La vi en el altar ♪
♪ Una diadema en su cabeza
y aquel novio ♪
♪ Se llevó
lo que más quiero ♪
♪ La imagen
no puedo borrar ♪
♪ Quiero sacar de mi memoria
su vestido blanco ♪
♪ El anillo en su dedo
y el beso que no le di ♪
Romeo: Hey!
[music]
[crowd cheers]
Santo Domingo!
[music]
♪ Ella no dio despedida
ni me invitó a la catedral ♪
♪ Por los chismosos del pueblo
llegué hasta la iglesia ♪
♪ Murieron mis sueños ♪
♪ La vi en el altar ♪
♪ Precisamente cuando
el padre los unió ♪
♪ Su boda iba a parar ♪
♪ Pero elegí que sea
feliz causando ♪
[mocking crowd screaming]
[whispering] I fucking
love you. Romeo.
And I love you. too.
Lenny Santos: We got
to know him as Anthony.
the regular man.
not Romeo.
Romeo. he has that persona
and that's worked for him.
But Anthony Santos
the real person...
this guy could be a comedian.
If he was not to be
a musician anymore.
this guy is the funniest guy
in the world.
Romeo: And Guillermo Conga.
[laughing]
Lenny Santos: He will have you
dying laughing.
He's very caring.
He's really cool.
Tommy Mottola: He's a gentle.
kind-hearted person.
a lot of fun.
Artie Pabon: He's a great
human being.
But when it comes
to his business. it's all off.
He wants his business
handled right.
Gerry Grimaud Jr.: I remember
one year. he's in Spain.
He called me after a concert.
I'm talking about a three.
four-hour concert. right?
Right after the show.
calling me up.
"Bro. remember
to raise up this guitar
"and this little word I said
in such and such mix.
Don't forget."
And. I'm like.
"Bro. I got it."
Joaquín Díaz: He has certain
work ethics that we follow.
Artie Pabon: Working day to day
with Romeo.
it's. um...it's tense.
And you got to be sharp.
You got to be on point.
Romeo: See.
when you do--
After that. go "Tú."
You're going--
[singing]
And it's. "Tú."
Romeo: "Tú."
Grizel Del Valle: Okay.
Romeo: Do that.
[singing]
Yeah. that shit
sounds fucking beautiful.
Do that.
Grizel Del Valle: Good.
Romeo: Come on. girl.
Mate Traxx: I see how he is
with everything that he does.
everything.
We're talking about recording.
but that's everything he does.
And he brings out
the best out of me.
I'm super honored by him.
Incredible.
Romeo: Okay. so...
I'm sorry.
Mate Traxx: You're fucking me up
over here.
See...see...see this?
And we're recording.
See this?
Look. look. look. look. look.
Watch this. right?
We're recording this right now.
Romeo: Don't get me on camera.
Mate Traxx: Watch. watch.
Look. look. See.
Romeo: So. look. I want
you guys to do something else.
Not like.
not criticize but just like
how it could be overwhelming
and...
Mate Traxx: I hope you're
recording this shit right here.
This is beautiful right here.
You record this
to have it for B roll.
Romeo: But share how
I pay very well.
[laughter]
So...so...so...
Mate Traxx: Yeah.
He does.
Let me tell you
something.
You see how he is?
That come to show you.
he's on top of it.
He's on top of everything.
even...even...even...even...
Romeo: When you're done here
and you're mixing it in--
Mate Traxx: I haven't slept.
I've been up since yesterday.
but you hear this. right?
That's what he is.
Romeo: And the cop.
the Chichi. the reference.
I need that.
Mate Traxx: I was about
to go home and sleep
because I'm dead tired.
No. he wants
to keep on working.
Romeo: Okay.
[applause]
[giggles]
[music]
♪ Hoy pensé.
si yo no te vuelvo a ver ♪
♪ No podré
desprenderte de mi ser ♪
♪ A todo individuo
le llegan etapas ♪
♪ Personas diversas ♪
♪ Eres la mujer de mis sueños
con imperfecciones perfectas ♪
♪ No existe otro hombre
en la tierra ♪
♪ Que me haga temblar
de las piernas ♪
♪ Con solo mirarte estremezco ♪
♪ Hoy quiero ilustrar
que por ti vivo ♪
♪ Tú para mí eres la luz ♪
♪ Amarte es una virtud ♪
♪ Voy a agregarte a la Biblia.
por divina y tan buena ♪
Artie Pabon: Everybody got there
and saw this magnificent
humongous stage
with waterfalls.
with lights with you know...
It was amazing for anybody
that attended the concert.
But leading right up to it.
and this is something
nobody knows.
we get there
the night before for rehearsals.
We still have 30% to complete.
There's wires hanging.
And Romeo is going
to kill me for saying this.
You know. he's going crazy.
Nobody ever seen him
going crazy and upset that.
"What's going on?
"Normally when I get to
a stage for rehearsal.
"it's 100% done.
"Why do I got wires hanging?
Why aren't these
screens on?"
So. it was a lot of tension.
Gerry Grimaud Jr.: Yes.
super perfectionist.
Super perfectionist.
Artie Pabon: And it has
to be perfection.
Mate Traxx: Everything.
Everything matters
most to Romeo.
Everything.
When I mean everything.
things that you'd be like.
"There's no way
this makes sense."
Everything.
Artie Pabon: And he wants
to know a small detail.
"What color are the curtains?"
And. you tell him the color.
[music]
Sergio George: Talent is only
a small part of it.
You have to care.
A lot of artists
who don't last don't care.
They just care about putting
the money in their pocket
and buying watches
and Rolex and a car.
And they don't care about
that person
who has to sweat every day
and has to go to a job
to work to have money
to afford to go see you.
You got to care
about that person.
They don't have
to buy your concert.
They don't have to
do anything.
They can just take their money
and go somewhere else.
So. show that person respect.
They have jobs.
they have worries.
they have problems.
They don't have
to go to your show.
I got to care about the public.
I got to care by putting
my right show together.
but it's got to be right.
[laughing]
♪ Yo por su amor ♪
♪ Que me enferma ♪
♪ Me merezco
una recompensa ♪
Raulín:Yeah!
[music]
Raulín: Romeo!
♪ Y hoy te pongo
una querella ♪
♪ Que este abuso se resuelva ♪
♪ Yo por su amor ♪
♪ Llevo un delirio
que me enferma ♪
♪ Yo por su amor ♪
♪ Merezco una recompensa ♪
♪ He sufrido lesiones y varios
perjuicios al corazón ♪
♪ Yo por su amor ♪
♪ Por el daño causado hoy
te demando por un billón ♪
[music]
Raulín: Dominican Republic!
Raulín: For Romeo.
I did it for you.
[music]
Romeo: Everyone that's a legend
is because they
brought something different.
And I would love to see bachata
10 years from now
where a bunch of. like.
you know. new blood.
you know. guys that
when I listen to them like.
"Whoa. I never imagined
this shit in bachata."
[music]
Mero: Utopia
is a celebration
of the past and
present of bachata.
For my final day
in the Dominican Republic.
I traveled to the town
of Cabarete
in search of the
genre's future.
[music]
[students singing]
Mero: Pay special
attention to shorty in the back
with the bandana
just playing the güira
and the bass drum.
And she's freaking it. bro.
[students singing]
Mero: Killing it.
Skills. bro.
[music]
Romeo: We need guys to be
in a basement right now
trying to be better than me.
Dudes that are like. "Shit.
I want to be the new king."
Mero: Right.
Romeo: You need that ambition.
You need to...
And I actually embrace that.
I don't take offense when I hear
a new guy talking about like.
"Yo. I want to be
the new king." you know.
because it's not disrespectful.
You need that.
I wanted to also be
better than everyone else.
you know. and that's
what I would love to see.
It's what's really
going to keep the genre alive.
Mero: Bachata has
now come full circle.
reaching global status.
And in turn. returning
to its roots in the countryside
to cultivate a new
generation of talent.
It's been incredible
to see bachata's past.
present. and future
here in the DR and feel it too.
♪ Quizás no lo puedas
comprender ♪
♪ Quizás no entiendas
la narrativa ♪
♪ Pero algo que
te puedo prometer ♪
♪ No quiero
hacerle daño a tu vida ♪
[music]
♪ De ese amor que ayer ♪
♪ Fue lumbre ni se
encuentran las cenizas ♪
♪ Eran épicos los besos ♪
♪ Hoy solo es juntar saliva ♪
♪ Llevo dos años pensando.
estresando qué le hago ♪
♪ Ay. pa volverte a querer ♪
♪ Puse mis fuerzas.
mas todo fue en vano ♪
♪ Amor enterrado
no vuelve a renacer ♪
♪ Intenté exigirle al alma
que te amara ♪
♪ Amenazando el corazón
con un puñal ♪
♪ Como un zombie
cuando tú me acariciabas ♪
♪ Ni mi carne has
podido provocar ♪
[music]
Mero: Being Dominican
but being born in the Bronx
and being first generation.
you took on that responsibility
of pushing that culture forward
because bachata is really
hard core Dominican music
and you took it
to like. a worldwide stage.
Romeo: I appreciate that.
you know.
because I want to be great.
And I want people
to speak about my music.
you know. 30. 50 years from now
and say like.
"Yo. that dude in bachata was
like. fucking Michael Jackson."
That's what I work for.
That's why I create music
to connect with people
and for people to have
these type of conversations
in barbershops and salons.
[music]
Mero: That wasn't that...
That wasn't the
whip music. bro.
[laughter]
[music]
Man: He made bachata cool.
Gangster!
[crowd cheers]
[laughing]
Mero: Since so many residents
of the Bronx
originate from
the Dominican Republic
and Puerto Rico.
everyone here has a
deep connection to the music.
[laughter]
[laughing]
[music]
Sergio George: Romeo brings an
energy to the live show
that's hard to explain.
It's not like he runs around
the stage and dances and...
It reminds me a lot when I
saw Prince perform in a show.
He commands attention.
And around him. they got
all these things going on
but yet you're transfixed
on him.
[music]
Thalía: Sometimes
the artist and the audience.
they have a love affair.
[crowd cheers]
Romeo: I see you. baby.
She's like. "What the fuck
is he gonna do?
What the fuck?"
Thalía: His audience
love him. trust him.
and believe him.
Romeo: I'ma do
whatever you want. baby.
[crowd cheers]
Artie Pabon: I will die
asking people.
"You have to go see Romeo
at least once.
even if you don't like
his music."
Rest assured
you will become a fan.
It's a transformation.
It's something else.
I can't tell you the number
of people that have gone
to a Romeo show
who have confessed.
"I've never been a fan
of his music.
You know. I don't
listen to bachata."
But once they go once.
it's like crack. man.
You're hooked.
And you're gonna go again
and again and again and again.
And I can't describe
that high to you.
Romeo: I got that
shit right.
[crowd cheers]
Artie Pabon: I've never
done crack.
but I have gone
to a Romeo show.
I don't get tired of watching.
I could watch him every night
for three hours
and I'm looking forward
to the next night.
And that's what happens.
you know.
People become addicted to what
this man can do in this stage
because it's not just...
he just doesn't sing a song
like you're playing a CD.
It's an experience.
It's just phenomenal.
Mero: Bodegas are
a New York City staple.
They first arrived in the city
in the 1940s and 50s
as Puerto Ricans
settled downtown.
Here Uptown in the Bronx though.
Dominicans opened
their own bodegas
similar to the colmados
from back home
where people not only shop
for necessities
but gather socially
as a community.
Of course. bachata
was usually the soundtrack
inside and out.
[music]
♪ La he visto desde niño
y no me he atrevido a hablar ♪
♪ Porque su mundo es fino.
muy selecto ♪
♪ Yo soy un vagabundo
para su clase social ♪
♪ Y en su familia
odian bachateros ♪
♪ Tengo un plan
pa llegarle necesito dinero ♪
♪ Es un mito que con
solo amor serás feliz ♪
♪ Yo no tengo ni un chele.
solo buenos sentimientos ♪
♪ Y mi amor no tiene
fondos para llevarte a París ♪
♪ Voy a hacer un asalto ♪
♪ Voy a robar un banco
para ser millonario ♪
♪ O ser un tumba polvo
de un gran diputado ♪
♪ Y que me den un cargo ♪
[music]
Romeo: I don't feel like
I've ever done something
that I'm completely
satisfied with.
with the exception of Utopia.
And the reason why I feel that
Utopia is the perfect project
is because there's
more of them than myself.
I was able to go into
different styles within bachata.
And it was very organic.
I didn't have to go listen
to each of their albums.
study them again.
No. it was just
something that...
It was my school.
Sergio George: He's so
well-loved by all these artists
from back in the day
because he shows them
a lot of respect
doing things that
he doesn't have to do.
Or he can just go by himself and
people are going to go anyway.
It's paying homage to all
these legends from before.
it's a testament
to him as a person.
that his responsibility
is to leave that legacy
for future generations
for them to not only say.
"Hey. look at me.
but look at the guys
that came before me.
These are the guys
I got my inspiration from."
which is important
for someone like him
who cares about the health
of not only
the market of bachata
but also his people.
Dominican people.
Marc Anthony: And as to how
he wakes up in the morning.
"What didn't I do today.
you know.
to represent my people better
or put this music
that has changed my life
in the best position possible?"
That's just the way he is
and not everybody's like that.
[music]
♪ Nos hizo daño
y no veo le remordió ♪
♪ Pues la secuela de su engaño
la hace sentirse superior ♪
♪ Hasta quedamos enemigos
en discordia por su amor ♪
♪ Caímos feos en sus garras ♪
♪ No sabemos quién
fue más idiota ♪
♪ Entre tú y yo ♪
♪ Los últimos tontos.
una canción ♪
♪ Tráiganos tequila.
whiskey y un litro de ron ♪
Lenny Santos: You know what's a
good thing about bachata?
A song comes out now.
you like it.
But then 15 years later on.
when you hear it.
your heart melts.
You're like. "Wow.
I remember that song."
So. bachata leaves that print.
It's not like some
other music like.
"Are you still
playing that shit?"
But bachata is like.
it goes on forever.
The older it gets. the better.
[music]
Lenny Santos: We had people
bury their loved ones
to Aventura music.
We had people get married
Do good things. bad things.
okay things to Aventura music.
I won't get into details
but a lot of stories.
♪ It's five in the morning ♪
♪ I'm feeling kind of lonely ♪
♪ Son las cinco en la mañana ♪
♪ Y no he dormido nada ♪
♪ Pensando en tu belleza.
loco voy a parar ♪
♪ El insomnio es mi castigo.
tu amor será mi alivio ♪
♪ Y hasta que no seas
mía no viviré en paz ♪
♪ Hoy conocí tu novio.
pequeño y no buen mozo ♪
♪ Y sé que él no te quiere
por su forma de hablar ♪
♪ Además. tú no lo amas
porque él no da la talla ♪
♪ No sabe complacerte
como lo haría yo ♪
♪ Pero tendré paciencia
porque él no es competencia ♪
♪ Por eso no hay motivos ♪
♪ No. no es amor ♪
♪ Lo que tú sientes ♪
Romeo: Cardi B.
♪ Se llama obsesión ♪
♪ Una ilusión
en tu pensamiento ♪
♪ Que te hace hacer cosas ♪
♪ Así funciona el corazón ♪
Romeo: Let's go!
♪ Hice cita para el psiquiatra
a ver si me ayudaba ♪
♪ Pues ya no tengo amigos
por solo hablar de ti ♪
♪ Lo que quiero es hablarte
para intentar besarte ♪
♪ Será posible que de una
obsesión yo pueda morir ♪
♪ Y quizás pienses
que soy tonto ♪
♪ Bribón y también loco ♪
♪ Pero es que en el amor
soy muy original ♪
♪ No enamoro como otros.
conquisto a mi modo ♪
♪ Amar es mi talento... ♪
Romeo: Henry. this is tradition.
♪ Disculpa si te ofendo.
pero es que soy honesto ♪
♪ Con lujo de detalles
escucha mi versión ♪
♪ Pura crema de chocolate.
juntarte ♪
♪ Llevarte... ♪
[music]
Romeo: Ooh.
Y'all never thought
y'all was going to see
this shit together. right?
[crowd cheers]
And we are Aventura.
Should we do one more song?
[music]
J. M. Calderón: Okay.
♪ Luna ♪
Romeo: Come on.
give me some light.
♪ Dime tú si ya me quieres
como yo la quiero a ella ♪
♪ Como tan solo se quiere
una sola vez ♪
♪ Luna ♪
♪ Que de noche nos alumbra ♪
♪ Juntito con las estrellas
escuchando mi canción ♪
Romeo: Come on.
Beautiful.
Come on.
Joaquín Díaz: It represents
the Dominican Republic.
And for that to be taken
out of the country
and brought now to the States.
South America. Europe.
you can hear bachata
all over the world right now.
So. it's come a long way.
I mean. Romeo's taken it
to the next level.
[music]
[crowd cheers]
Venezuela!
Romeo: Costa Rica.
Ecuador. Colombia.
Romeo: Nicaragua. Brazil.
Thalía: He's a poet.
He's a visionary.
Romeo: Chile. Bolivia.
Romeo: Mexico.
Marc Anthony: You're just
dealing with a tour de force.
That's it.
Romeo: Puerto Rico.
[crowd cheers]
Tommy Mottola: This guy is...
He's the king.
[crowd cheers]
[music]
♪ Nadie entiende cómo
este amor funciona ♪
♪ No se quiebra. no se dobla.
nada lo destroza ♪
♪ Les presto mi cerebro
que examinen ♪
♪ Anularte de mi mente.
ni quemando mis neuronas ♪
♪ Mami ♪
♪ Yo te amo hasta
lo infinito ♪
♪ Sólido como un meteorito ♪
♪ Lo que siento jamás
lo van a entender ♪
♪ Dudan ♪
♪ Los expertos buscan la cura
porque te quiero con locura ♪
♪ Desconfían que
sea humano. mujer ♪
[music]
Romeo: The kings.
You want this jacket?
[music]
♪ Yo te amo ♪
Romeo: The king stays king.
[music]
[fireworks]
[drum solo]
[music]
[crowd cheering]
Romeo: I tried to tell them.